## Battleships-Game-CS

"Battleships Games CS" is a single-player game coded in the Python Programming Language. It runs in the Python Terminal and is hosted in the Code Institute mock terminal on Heroku.

## Game Play

The app is a simplified version of the classic pencil and paper Battleships game (http://www.papg.com/show?1TMC).

The user has 15 attempts to guess where 5 hidden battleships are on a board with 24 places. The battleships' locations are generated by the code at random. Users must hit all the ships to win the game.

## Existing Features

### Randomly Generated Ships

Five ships are randomly placed on the 5 x 5 game board, and users cannot see the ships.

## User Input

Users are prompted to take a shot or a guess in the range of 0-24.

When users guess the correct location of a ship, this is marked on the board with an 'H' for hit.

If a user's guess is incorrect, then this is marked on the board with an 'M' for miss.

Upon entering a guess, users are informed via the terminal whether they have achieved a hit or a miss. The terminal will display 'DIRECT HIT!' or 'YOU MISSED,' followed by a quirky comment randomly selected in the code. This is done to add a little fun and flavor to the user experience.

If a user hits all the ships, they are informed with the message 'YOU WIN! ENEMY VESSELS DESTROYED!' and the game ends.

If after 15 attempts, the user fails to guess the location of all the ships, then the message 'YOU LOSE! ENEMY THREAT REMAINS,' and the game ends.

The chart below shows the steps the app takes from the start to the end of the game.

## Input Validation

If users enter a number outside the range of 0-24 or a non-numeric character, the program will re-prompt and advise to input the correct data.

If a user inputs the same guess more than once, they are alerted in the terminal and prompted to guess again.

## Potential Future Features

Computer Player

User can place their own ships.

User can select the number of ships.

User can select board size.

Ship Size and Direction Variation

Ships of varying sizes to enable tactical guessing. For example, if a ship was three places in length, it would take three shots to destroy it. If we imagine a ship is placed on the board at places 0,1,2, and a user guessed 1, they could then make educated guesses as to where else the ship could be hit.

Ships could also be placed in either a north to south direction or a west to east direction. This would again provide another opportunity for tactical shooting and enhance the user experience.

## Testing

The code was passed through the Code Institute Python Linter. Some minor errors were returned and corrected using the linter.

The game was played in the local terminal during the development phase. Incorrect input, such as numbers out of range and non-numeric characters, was given to test the input validation.

The project has also been tested in the Heroku mock terminal and is running as expected.

## Bugs and Fixes

### Random Number Generation

A function was written to randomly generate the ships. During testing, it was discovered that this method of generating random integers does not ensure non-duplicity. If the same integer is generated more than once, this creates a bug as the user cannot take the same guess more than once and thus cannot end the game. To address this issue, the function was modified. The modified function uses a while loop, broken by an if statement that checks for a list of 5 non-duplicated integers.

The above function solved the issue. However, through further development, another simpler solution was arrived at. The place ships function was removed entirely, and the built-in Python function 'random.sample()' was used. This was then placed inside the run game function.

### Ending the Game

During the development phase, the gameplay worked as expected, but it did not come to a smooth conclusion. If the user hit all of the ships, then the program continued to prompt the user for input until all of the turns had been taken.

To overcome this issue, an if statement was added to the for loop inside the run game function. The if statement utilizes the bool method. As shown in the code, the bool method is passed the ships variable as an argument. The ships variable is a list of the randomly generated integers, the ships. As the game progresses and if a user makes correct guesses, the integers/ships are removed from the list held in the ship variable. The bool method checks to see if the list is empty. If it is, the for loop breaks, the player is alerted that they have won, and the game ends.

## Development Process Git Commits Explained

The project that has been pushed to the GitHub repository was created using the Code Anywhere (CA) IDE platform. However, at the start of the project, the decision was taken to use the desktop version of Visual Studio Code (VSC). The original intention was to use VSC as a playground for experimentation and as an environment to figure out the logic needed to complete the app. The idea was to get the bones of the app in place in VSC and reconstruct it and develop it further in CA. The reasoning behind this was to avoid a messy and over-exhaustive git commit history. However, as things progressed through the development phase and the application began to take shape, it was felt that it had gone too far down the road to rebuild in CA. This is regrettable, as the commit history does not give a true reflection of the development process. Furthermore, it is recognized and understood that this is not best practice.

### Git Commit History

As can be seen, the majority of the commits are large and very close together in terms of time. This is a consequence of each function being copied one by one from VSC to CA. The obvious mistake here was not making commits via VSC.

The commit entitled "Edited code in CI Python Linter. Removed minor formatting errors" overwrites almost the entire code. This is because the CI Python Linter allows for editing, and the identified minor formatting errors were removed in the Linter. The code was then pasted back into CA.

## Deployment

Deployment Steps
1. Created an app in Heroku.
2. Set the build pack to Python and NodeJS.
3. Configured Vars to PORT 8000.
4. Selected Deploy Main Git Hub Branch.

## Credits
Dr. Codie
Dr. Codie's Battleships video series had a huge influence on this project. Where code from these tutorial videos has been used and modified is indicated in the run.py file.

References
1. http://www.papg.com/show?1TMC
2. https://trinket.io/python/051179b6d3

(Note: The text has been corrected for spelling, grammar, and punctuation, while retaining the original language structure and style.)